Business Continuity:
--------------------
1. Which is an example of an unscheduled event that leads to downtime in a storage infrastructure?  Hardware failure

2. What is an accurate statement about recovery point objective(RPO) in business continuity? It indicates when data was last backed up.

Data Replication:
-----------------
Snapshot Technology Overview:

Several data storage vendors implement snapshot copies for backup and replication. A snapshot copy is a point-in-time file system image.
For this discussion, we consider a storage operating system that uses pointers to the actual data blocks on disk, but does not rewrite existing blocks.
Rather it writes updated data to a new block and changes the pointer.

A snapshot simply manipulates block pointers, creating a “frozen” read-only view of a storage volume that lets applications access older versions of files, directory hierarchies, and/or
LUNs (logical unit numbers) without special programming. Because actual data blocks are not copied, snapshots are extremely efficient both in the time needed to create them and in storage space.

A snapshot takes a few seconds to create, regardless of the size of the volume or the level of activity on the storage system.
After a snapshot has been created, changes to data objects are reflected in updates to the current version of the objects, as if snapshot copies did not exist.
Meanwhile, the snapshot copy of the data remains completely stable. A snapshot copy incurs no performance overhead;
users can comfortably store a number of snapshot copies per storage volume, all of which are accessible as read-only and online versions of the data.
Snapshot technology forms the basis of high-availability, disaster-tolerant, and data protection solutions.

The figure below depicts how snapshots work.(See Fig.)
A file has blocks A, B, and C, and its snapshot is taken in Figure 1. In Figure 2, block B is changes by a user to B1.
The changed data (B1) is written to a new block and the file pointer is updated. However, the snapshot pointer still points to the old block, giving a live view of the data and an historical view.
In Figure 3, another snapshot is taken that reflects the live view of data. Now a user has access to three generations of data – the live one, Snapshot 2, and Snapshot 1, in order of age.
This is without taking up the disk space that the three unique copies would require.

System administrators use snapshot copies to take and maintain frequent, low-impact, user-recoverable copies of files, directory hierarchies, LUNs, and/or application data.
Snapshots incur minimal performance overhead and can be safely created on a running system. Snapshots allow near-instantaneous, secure, user-managed restores.
Users can directly access snapshot copies to recover from accidental deletion, corruption, or modification of their data.
Since the security of the file is retained in the snapshot copy, the restoration is both secure and simple.

1. True or false. Replicating data from a primary storage system to a secondary storage system within the same data center is an example of local replication. True

2. What is a benefit of asynchronous remote replication? It reduces write latency and improves application performance.

3. An organization has a primary data center and a remote disaster recovery site to which data is replicated asynchronously.
What is the correct sequence of steps in the remote replication process when a host writes data to a storage system at the primary site?
a. Data is written to a storage system at the primary site.
b. An ACK is issued to the host.
c. Data is replicated on a storage system at the remote site.
d. An ACK is issues to the storage system at the primary site.

Data Backup:
------------
